=epr-simulation=

An R⁷RS Scheme toolkit for constructing fully ‘local realistic’
simulations of EPR-B experiments. It is donated to the public domain.

The linear state space representation employed in quantum mechanics is
primarily a limited and obfuscated way to keep track of probability
theory calculations. ''It has no physical meaning.'' Here we do the
same calculations straightforwardly and, in this case, much more
easily and comprehensibly.

== This toolkit versus the orthodoxy ==

The orthodox belief in physics (in 2023) is that experiments of the
type conducted by 2022 Nobel laureate Alain Aspect are distinctly
‘quantum’ and prove the existence of this distinction from ‘classical’
physics. There is supposed to be a kind of ‘entanglement’ rather than
distinct particles, and action at a distance that resolves the
‘entanglement’ into distinct particles.

All of this is easily proven to be nonsense, for instance empirically
by simulations constructed using this toolkit.

That the nonsense is held true by the orthodoxy is not evidence in its
favor. It is evidence that something has gone terribly wrong in our
society.

== The impossibility of ‘irreducibility’ ==

That there actually is no ‘quantum’ physics distinct from physics
generally is easily shown by the following argument—

Once a ''physics'' problem is put into words, it becomes a word
problem in ''mathematics''. It is no longer in the realm of
physics. As ''mathematics'', the problem is subject to the rules of
''that'' field of study. One of those rules is that mathematics has no
fixed subject matter. Any problem in mathematics can be translated
into an endless number of problems concerning different
topics. Furthermore, any method used to solve a problem must arrive at
the same conclusion as any other.

Thus a problem in ‘quantum’ physics can be converted to, say, a
problem about Girl Scouts delivering cookies to their customers. The
new problem may be a contrived one, but the conversion ''can'' be
done. Also, any method used to solve the problem must arrive at the
same result as does quantum mechanics, if the solution by quantum
mechanics be correct. In published papers where a different solution
is reached (those by J.S. Bell, 2022 Nobel laureate John Clauser,
etc.), the authors ''have'' made mathematical errors.

The supposed ‘irreducibility’ of ‘quantum’ physics is not merely
false. It is a logical impossibility.

However, university students in physics are not taught to use logic or
scientific method. They are taught to be orthodox. They will quote
existing literature and cite peer review. They will do yet more
experiments based on that faulty literature. They will not attempt
disproof of the faulty mathematics. They will not run novel
experiments, such as simulations made using this toolkit, or any of
the many mechanical and electronic equivalents to the Bell test one
can invent. (See, for instance, my own ‘Stern-Gerlach Shutters’.)

== The correlation coefficient of the two-channel optical Bell test ==

Here I shall prove logically that the two-channel optical Bell test,
of the kind conducted by Alain Aspect in the early 1980s, is not
‘quantum’. It is not even ‘statistical mechanical’. It is not even
‘standing waves’, as apparently some have tried to model it. It is
merely pulses of light moving through polarizers.

=== Photons ===

I shall model the light as particles, called ‘photons’. Each photon is
plane-polarized at angle 0 or ''&pi;''/2, but we will call the first
case '''H''' for horizontal and the latter '''V''' for vertical. This
notation makes the mathematics easier to read. The photons are
generated in complementary pairs, polarized thus:
('''H''',&thinsp;'''V''') or ('''V''',&thinsp;'''H''').

Let the left side be indexed 1 and the right side indexed 2, in
whatever follows. So one might write

{|
|(photon<sub>1</sub>,&thinsp;photon<sub>2</sub>)&thinsp;&isin;&thinsp;{('''H''',&thinsp;'''V'''),&thinsp;('''V''',&thinsp;'''H''')}
|}

=== Two-channel polarizers ===

The intensity of the light in a polarizer’s channel, by the Law of
Malus, is inferred to be the probability of a photon being
retransmitted into that channel. Mathematical consistency requires
this inference.

Let the angle setting of the polarizer by ''&phi;''. Then the
probability of a photon being retransmitted into the '''(+)''' channel
is cos²(''&phi;'') for an '''H''' photon or sin²(''&phi;'') for a
'''V''' photon, and into the '''(&minus;)''' channel is sin²(''&phi;'') for
an '''H''' photon or cos²(''&phi;'') for a '''V''' photon.

=== Removing one of the polarizers from the problem ===

Let us set the left and right side polarizers respectively to
''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>&thinsp;&isin;&thinsp;&real; and
''&phi;''<sub>02</sub>&thinsp;=&thinsp;0. In that case on the right
side every '''H''' photon is retransmitted into the '''(+)''' channel
and every '''V''' photon into the '''(&minus;)''' channel. Thus we can
ignore that there is a beam-splitting polarizer on that side, and
simply map

{|
|'''H'''&thinsp;↦'''(+)'''
|-
|'''V'''&thinsp;↦'''(&minus;)'''
|}

Assign the value +1 to a photon detected in a '''(+)''' channel and
&minus;1 to a photon detected in a '''(&minus;)''' channel. This
choice of values makes the correlation coefficient equal the
covariance. That is, no normalization is needed. It can be computed
(with some care) as follows&mdash;

{|
|''&rho;'' = ''&rho;''<sup>++</sup> + ''&rho;''<sup>+&minus;</sup> + ''&rho;''<sup>&minus;+</sup> + ''&rho;''<sup>&minus;&minus;</sup>
|}

where

{|
|''&rho;''<sup>++</sup> = &frac12;(+1)(+1)&thinsp;sin²''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>
|-
|''&rho;''<sup>+&minus;</sup> = &frac12;(+1)(&minus;1)&thinsp;cos²''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>
|-
|''&rho;''<sup>&minus;+</sup> = &frac12;(&minus;1)(+1)&thinsp;cos²''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>
|-
|''&rho;''<sup>&minus;&minus;</sup> = &frac12;(&minus;1)(&minus;1)&thinsp;sin²''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>
|}

Using a double-angle identity, and taking advantage of
''&phi;''<sub>02</sub> being equal to zero, this becomes

{|
|''&rho;'' || = &minus;(cos²''&phi;''<sub>01</sub> &minus; sin²''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>)
|-
|&nbsp;    || = &minus;cos&thinsp;2''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>
|-
|&nbsp;    || = &minus;cos&thinsp;2(''&phi;''<sub>01</sub> &minus; ''&phi;''<sub>02</sub>)
|}

In the last expression,
''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;''&phi;''<sub>02</sub> is the
difference between the two settings. It would appear that the
correlation coefficient is invariant with respect to changes in the
actual angles, as long as this difference is maintained.

This fact somehow has escaped notice of the physics orthodoxy, even
though it should be apparent from the more general solution, even if
it were obtained by quantum mechanics. Using the invariance, one can
work ''backwards'' to the particular solution for
''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;''&phi;''<sub>02</sub>, and
so know how to derive the same result ''without'' using quantum
mechanics!

Let us make the invariance more formal.  Let
&Delta;''&phi;''&thinsp;&isin;&thinsp;&real;,
''&phi;''<sub>1</sub>&thinsp;=&thinsp;''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>&thinsp;+&thinsp;&Delta;''&phi;'',
and
''&phi;''<sub>2</sub>&thinsp;=&thinsp;''&phi;''<sub>02</sub>&thinsp;+&thinsp;&Delta;''&phi;''&thinsp;=&thinsp;&Delta;''&phi;''.
Clearly ''&phi;''<sub>1</sub> and ''&phi;''<sub>2</sub> can be any
angle settings of the polarizers:
''&phi;''<sub>1</sub>&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;''&phi;''<sub>2</sub> =
(''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>&nbsp;+&nbsp;&thinsp;&Delta;''&phi;'')&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;(''&phi;''<sub>02</sub>&nbsp;+&nbsp;&thinsp;&Delta;''&phi;'') =
''&phi;''<sub>01</sub>&nbsp;&minus;&nbsp;''&phi;''<sub>02</sub> is
their difference, and &Delta;''&phi;'' is a shared rotational
offset.

=== The general solution, derived without quantum mechanics ===

Thus the general formula for the correlation coefficient is

{|
|''&rho;'' = &minus;cos&thinsp;2(''&phi;''<sub>1</sub> &minus; ''&phi;''<sub>2</sub>)
|}

for any
''&phi;''<sub>1</sub>,&thinsp;''&phi;''<sub>2</sub>&thinsp;&isin;&thinsp;&real;.

This result is the same as that obtained by quantum mechanics. It had
to be: all mathematical methods, applied to the same problem, must
reach the same result.

According to the physics orthodoxy, however, it is not possible for us
to have derived this result from a ‘local realistic’ model of the
experiment. The orthodoxy is wrong. We just did it. Furthermore, as I
have already pointed out, they could have worked backwards from the
answer&mdash;which they already had by other means&mdash;to infer the
derivation above.

There is no ‘entanglement’. There is no action at a distance (a notion
no physicist should ever have entertained as possible). There is
nothing complicated about the experiment. Photons simply encounter
two-channel polarizers and are retransmitted into one channel or the
other. Nothing could be simpler. The probabilities of photons being
retransmitted into particular channels depends on the respective
settings, but the correlation coefficient depends only on the
difference between settings.

Of course, one might argue I have shown only that ‘entanglement’,
etc., are not ''necessary'' to explain the correlations. But let us
not be silly. There might be particles moving through
polarizers. There might be continuous electromagnetic waves moving
through polarizers, with photodetectors that trigger randomly (a
‘local realistic’ model by A.&nbsp;F. Kracklauer that also gives the
correct result). But there ''is no'' action at a distance, for
including action at a distance in the whole of human knowledge would
cause logical paradoxes. (Thus it should ''never'' be entertained.)
Whatever the actual mechanism, it would not be ‘quantum’ (non-local
preposterous) but rather ‘local realistic’ (action by contact).
